Storage RNs 4.15 (#69323)
openshift/openshift-docs: release_notes/ocp-4-15-release-notes.adoc

[id="ocp-4-15-storage"]
=== Storage

[id="ocp-4-15-storage-retro-sc-assignment"]
==== Retroactive default StorageClass assignment is generally available

> Prior to {product-title} 4.13, if there was no default storage class, persistent volumes claims (PVCs) that were created that requested the default storage class remained stranded in the pending state indefinitely, unless you manually delete and recreate them. Starting with {product-title} 4.14, the default storage class is assigned to these PVCs retroactively so that they do not remain in the pending state. After a default storage class is created, or one of the existing storage classes is declared the default, these previously stranded PVCs are assigned to the default storage class. This feature is now generally available.

Author: Fixed.

For more information, see xref:..//storage/container_storage_interface/persistent-storage-csi-vol-detach-non-graceful-shutdown.adoc[Detach CSI volumes after non-graceful node shutdown].

[id="ocp-4-15-storage-gcp-filestore-shared-vpc"]
==== Shared VPC is supported for the GCP Filestore CSI Driver Operator as generally available
Shared virtual private cloud (VPC) for the Google Compute Platform (GCP) Container Storage Interface (CSI) Driver Operator is now supported as a generally available feature. Shared VPC simplifies network management, allows consistent network policies, and provides a centralized view of network resources.

For more information, see xref:..//storage/container_storage_interface/persistent-storage-csi-google-cloud-file.adoc#persistent-storage-csi-google-cloud-file-create-sc_persistent-storage-csi-google-cloud-file[Creating a storage class for GCP Filestore Storage].

[id="ocp-4-15-storage-ibm-vpc-byok"]
==== User-Managed encryption supports IBM VPC Block storage as generally available

> The user-managed encryption feature allows you to provide keys during installation that encrypt {product-title} node root volumes, and enables all managed storage classes to use these keys to encrypt provisioned storage volumes. The encryption feature was introduced in {product-title} 4.13, and is now supported on IBM Virtual Private Cloud (VPC) Block storage.

Reviewer: `The encryption feature was introduced in {product-title} 4.13, and is now supported on IBM Virtual Private Cloud (VPC) Block storage.`
This is misleading, it's not an encryption feature per se, it's the ability to reuse the key used during installation. I think we should just say "The feature was introduced in {product-title} 4.13". Or if you want to be more precise

The feature was introduced in {product-title} 4.13 for GCP, Azure, AWS and is now supported on IBM Virtual Private Cloud (VPC) Block storage.

Author: Fixed.

For more information, see xref:..//storage/container_storage_interface/persistent-storage-csi-vol-detach-non-graceful-shutdown.adoc[Detach CSI volumes after non-graceful node shutdown].

[id="ocp-4-15-storage-gcp-filestore-shared-vpc"]
==== Shared VPC is supported for the GCP Filestore CSI Driver Operator as generally available
Shared virtual private cloud (VPC) for the Google Compute Platform (GCP) Container Storage Interface (CSI) Driver Operator is now supported as a generally available feature. Shared VPC simplifies network management, allows consistent network policies, and provides a centralized view of network resources.

For more information, see xref:..//storage/container_storage_interface/persistent-storage-csi-google-cloud-file.adoc#persistent-storage-csi-google-cloud-file-create-sc_persistent-storage-csi-google-cloud-file[Creating a storage class for GCP Filestore Storage].

[id="ocp-4-15-storage-ibm-vpc-byok"]
==== User-Managed encryption supports IBM VPC Block storage as generally available

> The user-managed encryption feature allows you to provide keys during installation that encrypt {product-title} node root volumes, and enables all managed storage classes to use these keys to encrypt provisioned storage volumes. This feature was introduced in {product-title} 4.13 for Google Cloud Platform (GCP) persistent disk (PD) storage, Microsoft Azure Disk, and Amazon Web Services (AWS) Elastic Block storage (EBS), and is now supported on IBM Virtual Private Cloud (VPC) Block storage.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The user-managed encryption feature allows you to provide keys during installation that encrypt {product-title} node root volumes, and enables all managed storage classes to use the specified encryption key to encrypt provisioned storage volumes. This feature was introduced in {product-title} 4.13 for Google Cloud Platform (GCP) persistent disk (PD) storage, Microsoft Azure Disk, and Amazon Web Services (AWS) Elastic Block storage (EBS), and is now supported on IBM Virtual Private Cloud (VPC) Block storage.
```
Maybe better, actually for installer seems it support different keys for master/worker nodes, while for our container storage we only use the one keyCrn inject to all managed storage classes, not keys.

Author: Thanks! Fixed.

Reviewer 2: @lpettyjo Thanks for the update! But seems I don't see the change in the latest commit, have you pushed it?

//TODO: For more information, see xref:..//storage/container_storage_interface/persistent-storage-csi-ibm-vpc-block.adoc#byok_persistent-storage-csi-ibm-vpc-block [User-managed encryption].

[id="ocp-4-15-storage-selinux-relabling-mount-options"]
==== SELinux relabeling using mount options (Technology Preview)
Previously, when SELinux was enabled, the persistent volume's (PV's) files were relabeled when attaching the PV to the pod, potentially causing timeouts when the PVs contained a lot of files, as well as overloading the storage backend.

> In {product-title} 4.15, for Container Storage Interface (CSI) driver that support this feature, the driver will mount the volume directly with the correct SELinux labels, eliminating the need to recursively relabel the volume, and pod startup can be significantly faster.

Reviewer 3: I'd write specific conditions where this feature works:

This feature is Technology Preview and **all** these conditions must be satisfied to benefit from this feature:

1. PersistentVolume must have access mode ReadWriteOncePod.
2. Pod that uses the PersistentVolume must have full SELinux label specified in its spec.securityContext or spec.containers[*].securityContext. This can be easily achieved by using "restricted" SCC.
3. The CSI driver that provides the volume announces support for this feature by field `seLinuxMountSupported: true` in its CSIDriver instance. All CSI drivers that are shipped as part of {product-title} set this filed.

Reviewer 4: Do we need to clarify that not suitable for block volume?

Reviewer 3: I updated my comment with Filesystem volumes.

Reviewer 3: I added list of CSI drivers that support SELinux in OCP 4.15.

Author: Thanks! I've added this info.

[id="ocp-4-15-storage"]
=== Storage

[id="ocp-4-15-storage-retro-sc-assignment"]

> ==== Retroactive default StorageClass assignment is generally available

Reviewer 5: LGTM

Author: Thanks!

For more information, see xref:..//storage/container_storage_interface/persistent-storage-csi-vol-detach-non-graceful-shutdown.adoc[Detach CSI volumes after non-graceful node shutdown].

[id="ocp-4-15-storage-gcp-filestore-shared-vpc"]
==== Shared VPC is supported for the GCP Filestore CSI Driver Operator as generally available
Shared virtual private cloud (VPC) for the Google Compute Platform (GCP) Container Storage Interface (CSI) Driver Operator is now supported as a generally available feature. Shared VPC simplifies network management, allows consistent network policies, and provides a centralized view of network resources.

For more information, see xref:..//storage/container_storage_interface/persistent-storage-csi-google-cloud-file.adoc#persistent-storage-csi-google-cloud-file-create-sc_persistent-storage-csi-google-cloud-file[Creating a storage class for GCP Filestore Storage].

[id="ocp-4-15-storage-ibm-vpc-byok"]
==== User-Managed encryption supports IBM VPC Block storage as generally available

> The user-managed encryption feature allows you to provide keys during installation that encrypt {product-title} node root volumes, and enables all managed storage classes to use the specified encryption key to encrypt provisioned storage volumes. This feature was introduced in {product-title} 4.13 for Google Cloud Platform (GCP) persistent disk (PD) storage, Microsoft Azure Disk, and Amazon Web Services (AWS) Elastic Block storage (EBS), and is now supported on IBM Virtual Private Cloud (VPC) Block storage.

Reviewer 2: LGTM

Author: Thanks!

//TODO: For more information, see xref:..//storage/container_storage_interface/persistent-storage-csi-ibm-vpc-block.adoc#byok_persistent-storage-csi-ibm-vpc-block [User-managed encryption].

[id="ocp-4-15-storage-selinux-relabling-mount-options"]
==== SELinux relabeling using mount options (Technology Preview)
Previously, when SELinux was enabled, the persistent volume's (PV's) files were relabeled when attaching the PV to the pod, potentially causing timeouts when the PVs contained a lot of files, as well as overloading the storage backend.

> In {product-title} 4.15, for Container Storage Interface (CSI) driver that support this feature, the driver will mount the volume directly with the correct SELinux labels, eliminating the need to recursively relabel the volume, and pod startup can be significantly faster.

Author: Fixed.

This feature is supported with Technology Preview status. 

If the following conditions are true, the feature is enabled by default:

* The CSI driver that provides the volume has support for this feature with `seLinuxMountSupported: true` in its CSIDriver instance. The following CSI drivers that are shipped as part of {product-title} announce SELinux mount support:

** AWS Elastic Block Storage (EBS)
** Azure Disk
** Google Compute Platform (GCP) persistent disk (PD)
** IBM Virtual Private Cloud (VPC) Block
** OpenStack Cinder
** VMware vSphere

> * Ensure the pod that uses the persistent volume has full SELinux label specified in its `spec.securityContext` or `spec.containers[*].securityContext` by using `restricted` SCC and set access  mode `ReadWriteOncePod` for the volume.

Reviewer: I think we should make it more obvious that it works ONLY with RWOP, the others access modes still rely on the old method.

Author: Called it out in separate bullet point. Fixed.
